In an earlier video,
we introduced the idea of the database and
the database management system, or DBMS,
which is a software application used for
creating, maintaining,
and accessing databases.
We also briefly introduced
a special type of database called
the relational database,
which is far and away and
the most popular type of
database used in business today.
The applications that run relational
databases are called relational database
management systems, or RDBMS.
While there are emerging database types,
if you want to be an effective analyst in
most organizations, you'll almost
certainly need to understand what
relational databases are, how they work,
and how to extract data from them.
In this video, we'll go a bit deeper
into the relational database itself.
And we'll spend all of module three
learning how to extract data from
relational databases using a language
called Structured Query Language, or SQL.
In relational databases,
we store information in tables, and
then define specific
relationships among those tables.
A table is a two dimensional structure
that stores data in rows and columns.
Most relational databases are row
oriented, meaning that the ideas or
items described in the table are stored
in rows, with the columns of the tables
containing attributes that describe
the ideas or items of interest.
Let's look at an example
of a database table.
Consider this table,
which we'll call FLIGHTS,
that contains information about
commercial airline flights.
Each row describes the one flight, and
each column describes
an attribute of that flight.
In this case, we have a flight identifier,
an aircraft identifier we call the tail
number, a flight number, departure and
arrival airports, departure and
arrival times, and the number of
passengers on-board the aircraft.
Sometimes we refer to the rows of a table
as records, a term that has its origins in
the idea that one would store information
about something in a physical record.
Kind of like how physical files were the
ancestors of the digital files we store in
our computers.
Similarly, we can describe
columns as fields or
attributes to reflect that they contain
data that describes the record.
We'll use rows and records,
and columns, fields, and
attributes interchangeably
as we go forward.
Each row of a table in a relational
database must be unique.
In other words, there can't be
duplicate rows in any table.
To ensure that each row is unique, we
define something called a primary key for
the table.
The primary key is a column or
set of columns that are guaranteed to
be unique for every row in the table.
There are a few ways that we
can define a primary key.
If a primary key can be constructed using
attributes that occur naturally in a data
record, we call this a natural key.
Sometimes this can be done
using only one attribute.
In other cases, it takes more than one
attribute to uniquely define a row.
In that case, we call the combination
of attributes a composite key.
Sometimes it's easier just to define
a new column in a database and
force it to be unique,
often by simply numbering each row and
incrementing that number
as new rows are added.
A key defined using this approach
is called a surrogate key.
A surrogate key usually doesn't have
a meaning outside the database.
It's something we've added simply to
facilitate the unique storage of data
records.
In our FLIGHTS table, the FLIGHT_ID
field uniquely defines each row, but
it doesn't really have
a meaning outside the database.
So this is an example of a surrogate key.
However, I could have
constructed a composite key
using the combination of FLIGHT_NUMBER,
DEPARTURE_AIRPORT, and
DEPARTURE_TIME, which also
turns out to be unique.
Because all of this attributes
are naturally occurring in the record,
this composite key would
also be a natural key.
When I start talking about
multiple tables in a database and
how they're related, it's useful to depict
them visually using a shorthand like this.
Here we list out all columns in the table
vertically instead of horizontally
with the table name at the top.
This shorthand lets us see
all the types of information
contained in the table in a compact form.
And as we'll see in a moment,
it also lets us more easily show how
tables are related to each other.
We can also incorporate information
about the primary key of our
table into the shorthand, like this.
I've simply added a PK to
the right of the FLIGHT_ID field,
which indicates that FLIGHT_ID is
the primary key of this table.
One thing you might also notice is that
all of the column names in our examples
use a continuous string of characters.
When I have multiple words or
abbreviations in my column names,
I've placed an underscore
between them instead of a space.
Most relational database systems
expect both column names and
table names to be in this type of format,
so keep that in mind as we go forward.
As we noted earlier, the real power of
the relational database is the way it
links ideas together by identifying
relationships between tables.
To do this, we define something called
a foreign key, which is a column or
columns that establish
a logical link between tables.
Usually the way this works is
that a foreign key in one table
matches the primary key in another table.
An example should help make this clear.
Let's starts with our FLIGHTS table using
the shorthand we just just introduced.
Suppose we have another table in
the database, called PLANES, that contains
information about specific aircraft,
like the TAIL_NUMBER, the AIRLINE name,
the AIRCRAFT_TYPE, the FLEET_TYPE,
and the number of seats on the plane.
The primary key of the PLANES
table is TAIL_NUMBER,
which is unique for each aircraft.
Since this does have a meaning
outside the database,
this is also a natural primary key.
You might notice that TAIL_NUMBER is
common to both the PLANES table and
our FLIGHTS table.
We can establish a linkage between
these tables by identifying TAIL_NUMBER
as a foreign key in the FLIGHTS table.
Visually, we can draw the linkage using a
line that connects these two field names.
Let's take this idea a step
further by adding another table,
called AIRPORTS, which has information
about each airport, including the COUNTRY,
STATE, CITY, POSTAL_CODE,
LATITUDE, and LONGITUDE.
Again, the airport name or
code is the natural primary key that
uniquely defines each row of the table.
In this case, it looks like there are two
fields in our FLIGHTS table that contain
the same type of information as AIRPORT,
DEPARTURE_AIRPORT and ARRIVAL_AIRPORT.
Both of these fields can be identified as
foreign keys that link the FLIGHTS table
to the AIRPORTS table.
In essence,
we've linked these tables twice.
Note that the column names in
the tables don't need to be the same to
establish a foreign key relationship.
All that needs to be true is that
they represent the same idea,
and that they are of the same data type.
Let's add one more table to our example.
Here's a table called CITY_PAIRS,
which provides information about
the route that a flight might take,
Including the DISTANCE between points and
a field called REGIONALITY that might
describe something like a domestic
route versus an international route.
In this table,
the combination of DEPARTURE_AIRPORT and
ARRIVAL_AIRPORT define
the unique row of the table.
So this is an example of
composite natural primary key.
The CITY_PAIRS table also seems to have
relationships to the FLIGHTS table, but
the relationship is a little
different this time.
Specifically, it looks like I need
both the DEPARTURE_AIRPORT and
the ARRIVAL_AIRPORT to establish
a link between the tables.
So that's exactly how I
describe the relationship.
Unlike the AIRPORTS table, I don't link to
the CITY_PAIRS table twice using a single
foreign key, but rather I link
it once using two foreign keys.
Okay, what we have at this point is
the beginning of something called
a logical data model, or a visualization
of how a database is structured.
The data model for a large database would
obviously have many more tables with many
more linkages among those tables.
As a data analyst,
it's always a good idea to try and
get your hands on a copy of the data
model so you can see what types
of data are available in the database and
how to make sense of the database itself.
This is particularly important when you
start thinking about how to extract data
for analysis.
You'll need to understand the database
structure to write effective queries
against the database.
We'll talk more about
that in module three.
One of the things you may have noticed in
our example is that we broke different
ideas into different tables.
There are a number of different
reasons we might do this.
We might find that different types of
data come from different sources, or
that some data changes rapidly
while other data changes slowly.
But broadly speaking,
the notion of trying to break data into
different ideas is called normalization.
It turns out that normalizing
data eliminates redundancy
by ensuring that we store unique data
only once versus multiple times.
For example,
what if we stored the AIRCRAFT_TYPE for
each aircraft in our FLIGHTS table
instead of in the PLANES table?
A single aircraft would
likely take many flights, so
every time there was a flight for
that aircraft in the FLIGHTS table,
I'd have the same aircraft type,
which is a bit redundant.
By putting AIRCRAFT_TYPE in a separate
PLANES table, I only need to store
AIRCRAFT_TYPE once, namely,
in the unique row for that aircraft.
In relational database design,
there is a special degree of normalization
called third normal form, or 3NF.
When a database is in third normal form,
all unnecessary redundancy has
been removed from the database.
While the definition of third
normal form is a bit technical,
it was paraphrased by Bill Kent
from IBM in 1982 as follows.
Every non-key attribute must provide
a fact about the key, the whole key and
nothing but the key.
What this means is that for a database to
be in third normal form, each table must
only contain information than in some
way directly describes its primary key.
Consider this example.
Here we have a table that describes
orders, with order ID as the primary key.
The attributes of this table are Date,
Customer_ID, Product_Name,
and Product_Type.
In this example, all columns seem
to describe the order directly,
except Product_Type, which actually
seems to describe the product.
So this table would not
be in third normal form,
since Product_Type is not
directly describing the order.
Okay, now we have a basic understanding of
what a relational database is, and how and
why we separate different ideas into
tables and relate them to each other.
So why are relational databases so
popular?
Here are a few reasons.
First, they allow us to group data
logically around discrete ideas.
This makes sense conceptually, and allows
the model to be understood more easily.
Secondly, as we mentioned earlier, they
can minimize the amount of duplicate data
stored in a database,
thereby reducing storage requirements.
They also minimize the number of places
where changes to data need to be made.
Consider the AIRCRAFT_TYPE
example we used earlier.
Let's say I needed to correct
the AIRCRAFT_TYPE for an aircraft.
It would be a lot easier to change that
value once in the PLANES table than to
have to change it in every record related
to that aircraft in the FLIGHTS table.
Additionally, in highly transactional
systems where lots of updates or
additions are made,
using relational database can improve
the overall performance of the database.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly to
the data analyst, a relational database
model is incredibly flexible in terms of
how data can be queried and extracted.
If constructed correctly, a relational
model presents very few limitations
on the types of data sets that can
be obtained from the database.
However, there are some
downsides to relational models.
The more normalized the database becomes,
the more complex the data extraction and
analysis operations become,
as more tables need to be joined
together to get consolidated data sets.
This is the cost of the flexibility
that the model provides.
It can also require more effort
to integrate fundamentally new
data domains or
data sources, as they must be architected
to fit within the current database model.
Sometimes it can be hard to fit new ideas
into a model that didn't anticipate them.
To get around some of these limitations,
some organizations opt for
data models that are not fully normalized.
It turns out that the more we find
ourselves joining the same tables together
for repeated operations, the more it
makes sense to denormalize information.
In other words,
we create structures that are not in third
normal form to facilitate things
like reporting and analytics.
The tradeoff of this approach is
less efficient storage of data for
more efficient interrogation of data.
Usually, this is accomplished by creating
tables downstream of a normalized
database model.
Or through the use of something called the
database view, which makes it look like
data is denormalized, even though the data
is actually stored in normalized tables.
With views, the tables are joined
dynamically in the background, but
the user only sees the denormalized
view of those tables.
The idea of denormalization is often taken
further through the construction of data
marts, or alternate non-relational
data structures, like cubes.
A data mart can be
thought of as a smaller,
specialized database that is established
for a specific user group or function,
like finance or
marketing campaign analysis.
Data marts usually contain a subset of the
information stored in a larger database
and may be normalized, denormalized,
or somewhere in between.
A cube is basically
an n-dimensional table.
So instead of a two-dimensional
table with columns and rows,
I might have a three-dimensional
structure with columns, rows and stacks.
Or even higher dimension structures
that can't be easily visualized.
Cubes are not relational
database structures but
are used pretty commonly in downstream
business intelligence tools.
Okay, we've covered quite
a bit in this video.
Let's recap.
We started by describing relational
databases as a collection of tables with
relationships defined among them.
We talked about how the uniqueness of rows
in a table is defined using a primary key,
how that key can be natural or
surrogate, and
how a composite key can be constructed
using multiple fields in the table.
We described how foreign key relationships
establish the linkages between tables, and
saw a few different ways in
which those linkages can occur.
We learned what it means for a data
model to be in third normal form, and
discussed the advantages and
disadvantages of normalization and
the relational database itself.
Finally, we presented a few examples
of how data is actually denomalized
to facilitate repeated data extraction
operations in reporting and analytics.
These ideas will be key in module three,
where we'll actually learn how to extract
data for
analysis from relational databases.